When a CNN is trained to classify images,
it's convolutional layers learn to extract
more and more complex features from a given image.
Intermittently, max pooling layers will discard detailed spatial information,
information that's increasingly irrelevant to the task of classification.
The effect of this is that as we go deeper into a CNN,
the input image is transformed into feature maps that increasingly care about
the content of the image rather than any detail about the texture and color of pixels.
Later layers of a network are even sometimes referred
to as a content representation of an image.
In this way, a trained CNN has already learned to
represent the content of an image, but what about style?
Style can be thought of as traits that might be found in the brush strokes of a painting,
its texture, colors, curvature, and so on.
To perform style transfer,
we need to combine the content of one image with the style of another.
So, how can we isolate only the style of an image?
To represent the style of an input image,
a feature space designed to capture texture and color information is used.
This space essentially looks at spatial correlations within a layer of a network.
A correlation is a measure of the relationship between two or more variables.
For example, you could look at the features extracted
in the first convolutional layer which has some depth.
The depth corresponds to the number of feature maps in that layer.
For each feature map,
we can measure how strongly
its detected features relate to the other feature maps in that layer.
Is a certain color detected in one map similar to a color in another map?
What about the differences between detected edges and corners, and so on?
See which colors and shapes in a set of feature maps are related and which are not.
Say, we detect that mini-feature maps in
the first convolutional layer have similar pink edge features.
If there are common colors and shapes among the feature maps,
then this can be thought of as part of that image's style.
So, the similarities and differences between features in a layer should
give us some information about the texture and color information found in an image.
But at the same time,
it should leave out information about
the actual arrangement and identity of different objects in that image.
Now, we've seen that content and style can be separate components of an image.
Let's think about this in a complete style transfer example.
Style transfer will look at two different images.
We often call these the style image and the content image.
Using a trained CNN,
style transfer finds the style of one image and the content of the other.
Finally, it tries to merge the two to create a new third image.
In this newly created image,
the objects and their arrangement are taken from the content image,
and the colors and textures are taken from the style image.
Here's our example of an image of a cat,
the content image, being combined with a Hokusai-style image of waves.
Effectively, style transfer creates a new image that keeps the cat content,
but renders it with the colors,
the print texture, the style of the wave artwork.
This is the theory behind how style transfer works.
Next, let's talk more about how we can actually extract features from different layers of
a trained model and use them to combine the style and content of two different images.